But our own mind, our this mind, also Buddha teaching mentioned the emptiness mind. It's true, it's
the emptiness. I don't know if we can find anything substantially solid existing at all.
It doesn't matter how much you're expert, how much you're investigating, analyzing, there's nothing
to be found.
Since, from the beginning of the 2600 years ago, until now, there's so many great intellectuals,
scholars, experts, ever as great as they analyze it, light it.
There's so many ways they're trying to find out, no body of form at all. So it's the emptiness mind
. But yeah, the emptiness mind is the source of every creation.
Everything is created by this emptiness mind. Mind is behind the scene, behind the scene of the
physical, behind the scene of the verbal communications that we know.
Yet, even though it's nothing to be found, yet it is really doing everything. And from the mind,
the reflection of this negative emotions, and this becomes the cause of suffering.
And then, with all that, sufferings are coming, that which is known as karma. So now, when you're
talking about karma, again, I mentioned yesterday, and now you know, it's not so they are talking
that you never heard them talking that, but it is karma.
Karma, so karma is made by the mind. Mind and the negative mind create the negative karma, and the
positive mind creates the positive karma.
And who is going to experience? This is one's own, our sub-one's own. Creators are going to
experience the karma.
That, loudly, clearly, doesn't matter how much time it takes, how many lifetimes it takes, but one
time, once and surely, it will be came so clearly, so vibrating with, and will pronounce that
exactly.
Even though, maybe, you don't know what the cause is, but it is according to the religious
teachings, Buddhism is caused by our own negative emotions.
So now, yesterday, we went, I mean, the idea of the negativity, there is two negatives. One is
natural negatives.
And that means, I think, universally, societally, through negativity, and those are ten non-virtues
.
And I listed those, and I went a little bit over each details of each point yesterday.
And that's natural. It doesn't matter whatever society you live, whatever tradition you are,
whatever language you speak, those ten non-virtues are,
everybody thinks this is not right, that is not right. That's what we call natural negatives.
Then, there is another negativity. Negativity is every conduit. If we did those, then you become
negative. Otherwise, it's not negatives.
And those are, I translated, for the day, forbidden un-virtues, all restricted un-virtues.
So that means, it's restricted, but if we maintain on that system, restricted as a line, then that
is not negatives.
But if we all pass that, if we didn't follow that rule, then it becomes negatives. Why?
Because also, we are, what's called, we are made commitment. We promise that we will keep that.
So you are against our own vote. We are against our own promise, our commitment, what we said.
And so that is known as, then, the public, what's called the forbidden or restricted non-virtues.
Now, restricted non-virtues is generally what is the teachings of the Buddha.
Every kind of use, general terminology of this restricted un-virtues is morality. It is morality.
Why? Because I made those guidelines, those rules, because to protect us from all habit patterns.
Therefore, these rules are not, kind of, like, possible. These rules are not just, kind of, ban
ishing.
These rules are not suppressing, pushing down us, but these rules make us more light, more simple,
more peaceful.
These rules, we can understand how important to respect each other and everyone.
How we should be safe in harmony and peaceful. We stay, how we stay should be safe.
So therefore, these rules are nothing but how to simplify our life with calm, peaceful, respect and
appreciation to every living being.
These rules and great collections are also known as, it's like, environmental friend. How respect
to everyone.
That's what it is, all that. So therefore, it is so special, so beautiful.
Once you follow that, it's nothing really anything, kind of, strangely ruled out, but nothing but
how to be mindfulness,
how to be kind and competitive, to preserve that attitude and act that way and maintain that way.
That's why the teaching is all that these rules are. And so when you're talking about the rule,
therefore, I talk about all that, the restricted or guidelines, what the Greek teacher Buddha
taught.
It has two guidelines. Those are known as, supposedly, short-time guidelines and long-term
guidelines.
Short-time guidelines are particularly designed for the lay practitioners.
And of course, ordinary ones can do the lay practitioners.
They also like to keep the guidelines or like to keep for short time, such as 24 hours.
And those are in the teaching said, what? Opascals. Opascals? Or it is also known, not sorry, I'm
making a different story,
but that is known as yin-ning, yin-ning, short-time. Short-time, 24 hours.
What do you keep for 24 hours? It is that first four principle negativities.
And those are killing, stealing, sexual conduct and lying. Those are four. Above that, toxicating,
any toxications.
Those are known as fire. Above that, not singing, not dancing, not putting the performs,
as well as not only ourself, all targeted at ourselves.
That is, those people individually, lay practitioners, like to keep that for 24 hours.
That is what they are really known as. At precise.
Again, not killing, not stealing, not sexual conduct, and not lying.
That is a poor principle. Above that, not toxicating.
And toxicating is what it's called. It's called, again, trying to steal more alertness.
Every toxicating we could lose or we will lose our mind from us.
So those are the five. Above that, known as not singing, not dancing, not performing.
And plus, and not putting ointments, not making makeup, not making ointment or performs,
and not only the ointments. Those are all targeted, at precise.
And then, with that, there is another ointment. Those are known as uni practice.
Many of you know, that's a very popular practice on the Tibetan Buddhism, uni practices.
That is also similar, but uni practices is a little more than 24 hours.
It is two days, 24 hours, two times.
And that is also above that, at precise, not drinking, not eating, and not talking.
When you are not eating, not drinking, not talking, or when you do that, when you take that
perception, what do you do?
Then, just completely, kind of completely engage it, and part, and spend time on the practice.
Meditating, reciting the mandana, and all cultivating with both each other, that's the really what
they do.
So that is the word, the new, short-time precise.
Now, second is long-term precise. Long-term precise is then can be divided into every set.
According to Vayayana teaching, divided into three.
And the parti mukcha vows, bodhisattva vows, and Vayayana vows. So there is three vows, all three
different commitments.
First is the parti mukcha vows, which is foundation vows, vows or the guidelines of the foundations
.
Now, what does that mean? Guide by the foundation of the bodhisattva vows, the foundation of the V
ayayana vows.
What is that? That is the parti mukcha vow, or many times, commonly named as the vinayas.
Vinaya vow is the foundation of the bodhisattva vows and Vayayana vows.
So that is really what the foundation is.
Vinaya vow, which is also known as parti mukcha vows.
Mukcha vows, all the vinaya vows, basic good vows or the guidelines of the basic bodhisattvas.
This is the difference between that guideline have been observed by the Mahayana practitioners of
bodhisattvas and as well as Vayayana practitioners.
Of course, of course, like with all the shagaka and the parti Buddha.
Yana, also they have to observe that, observe that practices.
So now we talk about the fourth, really about this first vow, post vows.
First vow is the parti mukcha vow or the vinaya vows.
Vinaya vow can be divided into two groups.
Laya practitioner vows and the ordinary practitioner vows.
That is the two major divisions.
Laya practitioner vows, that is, laya practitioners like to keep.
They like to be laya or as a regular person, but at the same time they like to observe, they like
to preserve some little vows.
So they can maintain more simple, more peaceful, more harmonized and maintain.
What are those?
In offering in the teaching said, for example, there are five principles of vows.
Five principles of vows are, again, not killing, not stealing, not lying, not sexual misconduct.
Those are the four groups.
Above that, not prosecuting.
Those are the five principles of vows of the laya practitioners.
Whether they are men or whether they are women.
And then there is the ordinary.
I am talking freely.
And then there are ordinary practitioners.
Then there is novasmong, male and female.
So that means novasmong, novasnams.
And then fully-oriented mongs, fully-oriented nams.
Then in the beat, when the fully-oriented nams, there is the old guelugmas, some other things.
But anyway, those are all known as ordinary mongs.
Again, if I talk freely about the vows of these Norse mongs, how many do they have vows?
The principle is ten vows, ten principles of vows.
And if we extend that mong, it is called thirty-three different vows, vows.
So novasmong have the thirty-three.
I would summarize that into the ten groups.
And those are very similar with that 24-hour vow, short-term vow.
That is very similar.
And what is the extra is, and not eating the food in the afternoon, at the same time not taking the
precious jewels or the precious materials
and not sitting the higher thrombs or higher bed or the expensive bed or expensive thrombs.
Those are the novasmong.
And then how many vows?
The mongs have two hundred and fifty-three vows, two hundred and fifty-three vows.
That is the mongs.
And the non-fully-ordered nams even have more.
And the teaching said three hundred and sixty-three, three hundred and sixty-three vows.
Why? Ladies have more vows because in the teaching said ladies are more vulnerable in obstacles in
the world, in the outer world.
Therefore to protect and to protect in the upkeep in their morality and their control.
So therefore those extra guidelines, whole hundred extra guidelines, those are the making.
Because it's all again, as I said, preservation and their vows at the same time not disturbing to
anyone.
Calm and peaceful, respect and appreciation.
That is the work of vows, of the Vinaya vows.
Now that Vinaya vow is foundation, as I said already, is foundation vows.
And above that when you take the Bodhisattva vows, Bodhisattva vows, that is above that.
Above the Vinaya vows you take the Bodhisattva vows.
Bodhisattva vows can be like summarized and again it is simplified is.
Bodhisattva, Bodhijeta, have you told them, in order to become, you take the Bodhijeta vows.
Bodhijeta vows has two divisions.
Wishing Bodhijeta and actualizing Bodhijeta.
Wishing Bodhijeta.
And wishing Bodhijeta is intention, of course you all know that.
Intention developing, dropping, compassion taught in the heart.
The principal essence of the Bodhijeta is compassion and wisdom.
Combination of compassion andlessness.
What that means? Thinking about, by compassion you are thinking about all living beings.
To remove their suffering and difficulty, troubles, a likely benefit, help to all beings die of
compassion.
By wisdom you are projected to obtain more skill, more method, more rapid realization.
So that you can apply that compassion and reach out to more easy to every living beings.
So therefore it is a combination of the compassion and the wisdom.
And how that develops in the heart.
How do you develop the uncondylation, unwelling and immense compassion when you develop that heart.
Thinking of all living beings.
And I like to really remove their suffering and difficulty.
I like to help to call my best couple of letters.
I really like to help with that.
When you have that attitude towards mind, that is known as wishing bodhijeta.
Wishing bodhijeta.
With that thought, now you take the vows.
You take the vows again from the linear masters.
The lineage, you take the vows.
Once you receive the vows, you become known as bodhisattvas.
Now, bodhisattva means a translated into English, created once for the enlightenment.
So to reach enlightenment, we have to have courage.
We have to have confidence.
We have to have disturbance.
We have to have open, vastness mind.
That is really the identity foundation and the key to fulfill the gain of the action of the bodhis
attvas.
That does all we need.
Why we need courage?
Because to help the descent of beings is not easy.
Even you have the capability to help, like to help the descent of beings.
You are determined to like to help the descent of beings.
It's not always easy.
Not always easy.
There are so many varieties of the emotions taught.
Even you do the best.
Maybe not necessarily understand exactly that way.
Instead that you help, the God may be the bodhisattva.
There will be something to be upset.
So therefore, you have to have courage.
Courage, commitment, that which is also known as patience.
Patience.
Patience for the hardship, the difficulty, the troubles that go through.
This is also not just a short time commitment.
Bodhisattva has the commitment to free all the living beings to the enlightened status.
All the living beings.
How many beings there?
According to the Buddha's teaching, there are even no numbers.
Numbers.
So many beings.
And so many these beings, each of them has so many emotions.
So many karmas.
So many negative feelings.
So you have to swinging.
Swinging along the emotions like bumpy is right.
It's everywhere.
Therefore, bodhisattva means the courage of one's body in life.
Keep courage, commitment, confidence.
Patience, all the openness, not becoming timid and tired and bored and depressed and drop down.
Then it's not bodhisattvas.
Long last go for the likeness.
Also in the teaching said, great master Shanti Devas and other great masters,
if you have the determination to lend to help to all the sentient beings,
treat it at that time with great compassion.
What actually you are doing?
You are purifying.
We individually purify our karma, our obscurations, our negative witness.
Why don't you do that?
We are gaining the accumulation merit.
When we got accumulation merit, our physical basis becomes stronger.
Our immune system becomes stronger.
Stronger.
Shimmering that.
At the same time, you also have to meditate and agrade everything on the teachings.
Therefore, it's also really developing great, big wisdom.
Big wisdom and that purifying again have been dependent on the obscurations.
So among the two obscurations,
negative obscurations, emotional obscurations are purifying,
and knowledge obscurations are purifying.
I'm sure you know all those terminologies and those other philosophies.
You can even look to the Googles.
You can look what means knowledge obscurations, what means emotional obscurations.
You couldn't find that.
For that reason, great master Shanti Devas said,
when you have the great compassion,
so even if you stay a long time in the samsara,
your physical will be good shape, immune systems,
those all are completely strong, developed.
You will be very good state and you won't have the suffering.
You won't have suffering.
And your wisdom mind is so strong, big,
and therefore your mind will be mindful and happy,
comfortable and happy,
physical will be comfortable and happy.
Therefore, even if you stay a long time in the samsara by your compassion,
you will not be bored and tired.
This is really true.
Those great bodies are for great enlightenings.
External looks like they are going to be such a big difficulty troubles.
But reality level, maybe they are not exactly explaining things.
That's what we see.
So that's the lead by your power of realization.
Power of the merit starts forming.
Therefore, then it's known as you become the bodhisattva.
Now when you become the bodhisattva,
you are protecting the vows,
vows of the bodhicitta.
Then what do you do?
Now you have to keep that vows.
One great master longkeeper said in the teachings,
"The principal vows of the wishing bodhicitta is poor, boneless."
Poor, boneless, we have sizzling quality,
precious quality of the poor, boneless in the heart and mind.
That is known as we are keeping up the vows of the wishing bodhicitta.
And poor, boneless are how we shine.
As we shine, bodhisattva,
our gracious kindness compare your teacher's practices,
bodhisattva, vedicayana.
And may all living beings have the happiness and cause of happiness.
That is boneless love.
Pray of the boneless love.
And may all living beings are free from suffering and cause of suffering.
That is boneless compassion.
May all living beings always be a great joyful state without any suffering.
And that is boneless joy or boneless rejoice.
May every living have the great realization of equanimity,
free from the attachment to the close ones and rejection to the others.
That is boneless of the equanimities.
When we joined that, we not just merely left service or joined it,
but really wishing sincerely in the heart and mind.
Mind, we are upkeeping the vows of the wishing bodhicitta.
That is what we vows of the wishing bodhicitta.
And then now, what is the vows of the actualizing bodhicitta?
Again, the great master of the mukimba said,
the wishing bodhicitta.
The vows of the actualizing bodhicitta is six paramatas.
Six paramatas.
Transcendent, generous paramata is translated.
And morality paramatas.
Patience paramatas.
During the effort of paramatas, concentrated paramatas
and the wisdom paramatas.
Those are the six paramatas.
But best upon the poor, boneless.
That means the generous paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
And morality paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
Patience paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
And the joyful effort paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
Concentrated paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
And wisdom paramata best upon the poor, boneless.
And we keep that sizzling in the heart and mind, then do the activity of the six paramatas.
That is known as the vows of the wishing bodhicitta.
Very simple.
Another word also in the teaching said, can be very or tired bodhic chadasi.
Bodhisattva's vows can be summarized into these three.
Those are known as morality that will avoid all the negativities.
All the negativities.
Morality that will gather all the virtues.
And morality that will benefit for all living beings.
All living beings.
So that three is the summary of the vows of the bodhicitta.
Bodhisattva's.
Which is best upon the Vinaya vows.
Either way, whether it's lay practitioner or whether it's ordinary practitioners.
That is best upon them.
Then next one is the Vediyana vows.
And I'm going to stop here today and we go tomorrow.
And already I think Lama Laya sent already email where we are going to continue this retreat.
Other weeks and practices that are reminded of the Dharma.
Or represent our understanding of the Dharma.
So that we can observe nicely and carry that on.
And then also we do the healing practice for all the living beings going through really that.
And then also not just healing.
This cause of this sicknesses too.
And then all the suffering and difficulty.
Every living being is going through that.
So this practice of what we're going to do with healing practices.
It's just for all the purposes.
Really to a kind of wishing that.
And then more targeted with all the current situation.
And that is then our bodhisattva activity too.
Bodhisattva that's what we can do.
And the following also instructs of the doctors.
Expertise everything.
And maintain our self well-being.
And also help to the others.
All that is really bodhisattva activity.
And then many I think understand.
There also is really good not go out.
And which is good for you.
And also good for the others that which is good for them.
So we follow this instruction.
And we line up in the teaching what we're talking of.
What we follow.
The teaching of the Buddha Shakyamuni.
So that's how my talk today.
Thank you very much everyone.
Again thank you.
Now we do that again.
Just short meditation.
Very short meditation.
And then we do the healing practices.